Istio lets you connect, secure, control, and observe services.

Service mesh is the network of microservices that make up applications and the interactions between them.

functionality:
- auto load balancing for HTTP, gRPC, WebSocket and TCP traffic
- fine grained control of traffic behavior with routing rules, retries, failovers and fault injection
- a pluggable policy layer and configuration API supporting access controls, rate limits and egress
- automatic metrics, logs, and traces for all traffic within a cluster, including cluster ingress and egress
- secure service-to-service communication in a cluster with strong identity-based authentication and authorization

core features:
- traffic management: rule configuration, traffic routing let you control traffic flows and API calls
- security: secure communication channel, authentication, authorization, and encryption of service communication at scale
- observability: tracing, monitoring, logging
- platform support: deployment on Kubernetes, registered with Consul, running on individual VM

ARCHITECTURE
Data plane is composed of intelligent proxies (Envoy) deployed as sidecars. Envoy proxies work with Mixer (policy and telemetry hub) to control all network communication.
Each service has its own proxy. Traffic between proxies is using HTTP1/2, gRPC or TCP, with or without mTLS.
Envoy:
high-performance proxy developed in C++ to mediate all inbound and outbound traffic for all services in the service mesh
extracts a wealth of signals about traffic behavior as request level attributes and send to Mixer

Control plane configures proxies to route traffic and configures Mixers to enforce policies and collect telemetry.
Pilot config data to proxies, Mixer check policies with proxies, Citadel applies mTLS to proxies
- Mixer: enforces access control and usage policies across the service mesh and collect telemetry
- Pilot: provides service discovery for Envoy, traffic management (AB tests, canary) and resiliency (timeouts, retries, circuit breakers)
- Citadel: provides strong service-to-service and end-user authentication with built-in identity and credential management

PILOT - TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
which rule the traffic should follow instead of which specific pods should receive traffic.
proportion of traffic routed to a new version / content of request decides the destination of request
let you specify which rules to use and configure failure recovery features (timeouts, retries, circuit breakers)
maintain a canonical model for all services and use this as service discovery

service versions subdivide service instances by versions
clients know nothing about versions and Envoy decides where to go

requests have request flow to follow, which is a list of proxies 
AB testing, canary testing, forwarding to external services are all possible

provides loadbalancing for traffic to multiple instances of the same service version
services in the mesh access each other using DNS names, HTTP traffic rerouted through Envoy, Envoy distributes the traffic across instances in the load balancing pool
instead of Envoy's complex LB algorithm, Istio only has roundrobin, random, least weight

failures (timeouts, retries, number limit of requests and connections, health checks, circuit breakers(passive health checks))
special HTTP headers can override timeout and retries when Apps want to.
Apps still handle failures, apps' failure recovery is separated from Istio's

Fault injection
You can configure faults to be injected into requests that match specific conditions. You can further restrict the percentage of requests that should be subjected to faults. Two types of faults can be injected: delays and aborts.

Rule Configuration
- VirtualService: defines the rules that control routing (95% of incoming traffic for a ''reviews'' service go to version1)
- DestinationRule: configures the policy set to be applied to a request after VirtualService routing happened (set load balancer, circuit breaker, TLS, ...)
- ServiceEntry: used to enable requests to services from outside of Istio
- Gateway: configures a load balancer for HTTP/TCP traffic, working at edge of a mesh for ingress traffic

conditional rules and multiple matches are allowed (andor) and priority

CITADEL - SECURITY
also involves Envoy(for secure communication between client and server), pilot(for authentication policies and secure naming information) and mixer(for authorization and auditing)
on client side, server identity is checked with secure naming information
on server side, based on authorization policies

share same identity document with SPIFFE
PKI(Public Key Infrastructure) used

two types of authentication:
- transport authentication: verify clients making the connection, offer mTLS as a stack of solution
- origin authentication: end-user authentication, verify the requester

mTLS authentication:
- Istio re-routes the outbound traffic from a client to the client’s local sidecar Envoy.
- The client side Envoy starts a mutual TLS handshake with the server side Envoy. During the handshake, the client side Envoy also does a secure naming check to verify that the service account presented in the server certificate is authorized to run the target service.
- The client side Envoy and the server side Envoy establish a mutual TLS connection, and Istio forwards the traffic from the client side Envoy to the server side Envoy.
- After authorization, the server side Envoy forwards the traffic to the server service through local TCP connections.

secure naming contains N-to-N mappings encoded in certificates which means A is allowed and authorized to run B
authentication policies: specify the policies for specific services
policy storage scope: Mesh-scope policy (there can only be one), namespace-scope policy, service-specific scope (this don't need to be stored)
narrowest match first

authorization: role-based access control
.yaml files go to Istio Config server and send them to pilot which send policies to proxies for services
policy looks like:
The combination of ServiceRole and ServiceRoleBinding specifies: who is allowed to do what under which conditions. Specifically:
- who refers to the subjects section in ServiceRoleBinding.
- what refers to the permissions section in ServiceRole.
- which conditions refers to the conditions section you can specify with the Istio attributes in either ServiceRole or ServiceRoleBinding.

MIXER - POLICIES AND TELEMETRY
The Envoy sidecar logically calls Mixer before each request to perform precondition checks, and after each request to report telemetry.
The sidecar has local caching such that a large percentage of precondition checks can be performed from cache.
Additionally, the sidecar buffers outgoing telemetry such that it only calls Mixer infrequently.

mixer provides:
- backend abstraction: insulates the rest of Istio from implementation of individual infrastructure backends
- Intermediation: operators have control over interactions between mesh and infrastructure backends

reliability and latency:
- statelessness: doesn't manage its own persistent storage
- hardening: designed to be highly reliable
- caching and buffering: accumulate a large amount of transient ephemeral state

first-level cache for each sidecar, second-level shared cache at Mixer

Attributes: description of a specific service request or the environment for the request

Configuration Model:
configuring a set of handlers, determine the adapter of mixer to be used
configuring a set of instances, describe how to map request attributes into adapter inputs
configuring a set of rules, describe when an adapter is called and which instance is given



****************************************************************************
Appendencies
gRPC is an open source remote procedure call system initially developed at Google.
It uses HTTP/2 for transport, Protocol Buffers as the interface description language, and provides features such as authentication, bidirectional streaming and flow control, blocking or nonblocking bindings, and cancellation and timeouts.
It generates cross-platform client and server bindings for many languages.
Most common usage scenarios include connecting services in microservices style architecture and connect mobile devices, browser clients to backend services.

Kubernetes: solution for orchestrating containers, extensive than Docker Swarm.
It works around the concept of pods, which are scheduling units (and can contain one or more containers) in the Kubernetes ecosystem, and they are distributed among nodes to provide high availability.

mTLS: Mutual authentication or two-way authentication refers to two parties authenticating each other at the same time, being a default mode of authentication in some protocols.

circuit breaker: when an action involves multiple services but some of them are down, circuit breaker makes it fault tolerant
It wraps a function with a monitor that tracks failures. The circuit breaker has 3 distinct states, Closed, Open, and Half-Open
Closed when everything is normal, all calls pass through to the services. when the number of failures exceeds a threshold, go to open.
Open, returns error without executing the function
Half-open, after a timeout, go to halfopen to check if the underlying problem still exists.

SPIFFE: standard which provides a specification for a framework capable of bootstrapping and issuing identities to services across heterogeneous environments.
